The Project Gutenberg EBook of Project Gutenberg (1971-2005), by Marie Lebert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: Project Gutenberg (1971-2005)

Author: Marie Lebert

Release Date: October 26, 2008 [EBook #27039]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROJECT GUTENBERG (1971-2005) ***




Produced by Al Haines









PROJECT GUTENBERG (1971-2005)


MARIE LEBERT


NEF, University of Toronto, 2005

Copyright © 2005 Marie Lebert

Dated August 15, 2005, this long article (following a short version published in
June 2004 [and copied at the end of this file]) is a paper for the third
International Colloquium on ICT-enhanced French Studies: Dialogues across
languages and cultures, October 2005, York University, Toronto, Canada. This
article is dedicated to all Project Gutenberg and Distributed Proofreaders
volunteers on the five continents, who offer us a free library of 16,000
high-quality eBooks, mainly classics of world literature, with a goal of one
million eBooks in ten years.

With many thanks to Russon Wooldridge, who kindly edited this long article. The
original version is available on the NEF, University of Toronto:
http://www.etudes-francaises.net/dossiers/gutenberg_eng.htm

The French version is: Le Projet Gutenberg (1971-2005). The updated
English version is: Project Gutenberg (1971-2008).


TABLE


1. Summary

2. History, From the Origins to Today

3. The Public Domain, an Endless Topic

4. The Method Adopted by Project Gutenberg

5. Distributed Proofreaders, to Handle Shared Proofreading

6. eBooks in More and More Languages

7. From the Past to the Future

8. Chronology [updated in 2006]

9. Links

10. Short Version [dated 2004]


1. SUMMARY


My fascination for Project Gutenberg is not new, but it doesn't wane. Nobody has
done a better job of putting the world's literature at everyone's disposal. And
to create a vast network of volunteers all over the world, without wasting
people's skills or energy.

Here is the story in a few lines.

In July 1971, Michael Hart created Project Gutenberg with the goal of making
available for free, and electronically, literary works belonging to the public
domain. A project that has long been considered by its critics as impossible on
a large scale. A pioneer site in a number of ways, Project Gutenberg was the
first information provider on the internet and is the oldest digital library.
Michael himself keyed in the first hundred books.

When the internet became popular, in the mid-1990s, the project got a boost and
an international dimension. Michael still typed and scanned in books, but now
coordinated the work of dozens and then hundreds of volunteers in many
countries. The number of electronic books rose from 1,000 (in August 1997) to
2,000 (in May 1999), 3,000 (in December 2000) and 4,000 (in October 2001).

30 years after its birth, Project Gutenberg is running at full capacity. It had
5,000 books online in April 2002, 10,000 books online in October 2003, and
15,000 books online in January 2005, with 400 new books available per month, 40
mirror sites in a number of countries, and books downloaded by the tens of
thousands every day.

Whether they were digitized 20 years ago or they are digitized now, all the
books are captured in Plain Vanilla ASCII (the original 7-bit ASCII), with the
same formatting rules, so they can be read easily by any machine, operating
system or software, including on a PDA or an eBook reader. Any individual or
organization is free to convert them to different formats, without any
restriction except respect for copyright laws in the country involved.

In January 2004, Project Gutenberg had spread across the Atlantic with the
creation of Project Gutenberg Europe. On top of its original mission, it also
became a bridge between languages and cultures, with a goal of one million
eBooks in 2015, and a number of national and linguistic sections. While adhering
to the same principle: books for all and for free, through electronic versions
that can be used and reproduced indefinitely. And, as a second step, the
digitization of images and sound, in the same spirit.


2. HISTORY, FROM THE ORIGINS TO TODAY


= The Beginnings in 1971

Let us get back to the beginnings of the project. When he was a student at the
University of Illinois (USA), Michael Hart was given $100,000,000 of computer
time at the Materials Research Lab of his university. On July 4, 1971, on
Independence Day, Michael keyed in The United States Declaration of Independence
(signed on July 4, 1776) to the mainframe he was using. In upper case, because
there was no lower case yet. But to send a 5 K file to the 100 users of the
embryonic internet would have crashed the network. So Michael mentioned where
the eText was stored (though without a hypertext link, because the web was still
20 years ahead). It was downloaded by six users. Project Gutenberg was born.

Michael decided to use this huge amount of computer time to search the public
domain books that were stored in our libraries, and to digitize these books. He
also decided to store the electronic texts (eTexts) in the simplest way, using
the plain text format called Plain Vanilla ASCII, so they can be read easily by
any machine, operating system or software. A book would become a continuous text
file instead of a set of pages, with caps for the terms in italic, bold or
underlined of the print version.

Soon afterwards he defined Project Gutenberg's mission: to put at everyone's
disposal, in electronic versions, as many literary works of the public domain as
possible for free. As he stated years later, in August 1998, "We consider eText
to be a new medium, with no real relationship to paper, other than presenting
the same material, but I don't see how paper can possibly compete once people
each find their own comfortable way to eTexts, especially in schools."

= Persevering from 1972 to 1989

After he keyed in The United States Declaration of Independence in 1971, Michael
went on in 1972 and typed in a longer text, The United States Bill of Rights,
that includes the ten first amendments added in 1789 to the Constitution (dated
1787) and defining the individual rights of the citizens and the distinct powers
ot the Federal Government and the States. In 1973, Michael typed in the full
text of The United States Constitution.

From one year to the next, disk space was getting larger, by the standards of
the time (there was no hard disk yet), so it was possible to plan bigger files.
Michael began typing in the Bible, because the individual books of the Bible
could be processed separately as different files. He also worked on the
collected works of Shakespeare, with one play at a time, and a file for each
play. That edition of Shakespeare was never released, due to copyright changes.
If Shakespeare's works belong to the public domain, the comments and notes may
be copyrighted, depending on the publication date. But other editions belonging
to the public domain were posted a few years later.

In parallel, the internet, which was still embryonic in 1971, was born in 1974
with the launching of TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol / Internet
Protocol). Its rapid expansion started in 1983.

In August 1989, Project Gutenberg celebrated the completion of its 10th eText,
The King James Bible.

= 10 to 1,000 eBooks from 1990 to 1996

In 1990, there were 250,000 internet users, and the standard was 360 K disks. In
January 1991, Michael keyed in Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis
Carroll (published in 1865). In July 1991, he typed in Peter Pan, by James M.
Barrie (published in 1904). These two worldwide classics of childhood literature
each fitted on one disk.

1991 was also the year the web became operational. The first browser, Mosaic,
was released in November 1993. As the web was becoming a popular medium, it
became easier to circulate eTexts and recruit volunteers. Project Gutenberg
gradually got into its stride, with the digitization of one eText per month in
1991, two eTexts per month in 1992, four eTexts per month in 1993 and eight
eTexts per month in 1994. In January 1994, Project Gutenberg celebrated its
100th eText by releasing The Complete Works of William Shakespeare. The steady
growth went on, with an average of 8 eTexts per month in 1994, 16 eTexts per
month in 1995, and 32 eTexts per month in 1996.

As we can see, from 1991 to 1996, the "output" doubled every year. While
continuing to digitize books, Michael was also coordinating the work of dozens
of volunteers. At the end of 1993, Project Gutenberg's eTexts were organized
into three main sections: a) "Light Literature", such as Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland, Peter Pan or Aesop's Fables; b) "Heavy Literature", such as the
Bible, Shakespeare's works or Moby Dick; c) "Reference Literature", such as
Roget's Thesaurus, and a set of encyclopaedias and dictionaries.

Project Gutenberg's goal is to be "universal" both for the literary works that
are chosen and the audience who reads them. The goal is to put literature at
everyone's disposal. With a focus on books that many people would use
frequently, and not only students and teachers. For example, the "Light
Literature" section is intended for pre-schoolers as well as their grandparents.
The aim is that they will want to look up the eText of Peter Pan when they come
back from watching Hook at the movies. Or that they will read the eText of
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland after seeing it on TV. Or that they will look
for the context of a quotation after hearing it in one of the Star Trek
episodes; nearly every episode of Star Trek quotes from books which are in the
Project Gutenberg collections.

The idea is that, whether they were avid readers of print books or not in the
past, people should easily be able to look up quotations they hear in
conversations, movies, music, or they read in books, newspapers and magazines,
within a library containing all these quotations in an easy-to-use format.
eTexts don't take up much space in ASCII format. They can be easily downloaded
with a standard phone line. Searching a word or a phrase is simple too. People
can easily search an entire eText by using the plain "search" menu available in
any program."

= 1,000 eBooks in August 1997

In 1997, the "output" was still an average of 32 eTexts per month. In June 1997,
Project Gutenberg released The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood, by Howard Pyle
(published in 1883). In August 1997, it released its 1000th eText, La Divina
Commedia di Dante (published in 1321), in Italian, its original language.

In August 1998, Michael wrote: "My own personal goal is to put 10,000 eTexts on
the Net [editor's note: his goal was reached in October 2003] and if I can get
some major support, I would like to expand that to 1,000,000 and to also expand
our potential audience for the average eText from 1.x% of the world population
to over 10%, thus changing our goal from giving away 1,000,000,000,000 eTexts to
1,000 times as many, a trillion and a quadrillion in US terminology."

= 1,000 to 5,000 eBooks from 1998 to 2002

From 1998 to 2000, there was a steadfast average of 36 new eTexts per month. In
May 1999, there were 2,000 eTexts. The 2000th eText was Don Quijote, by
Cervantes (published in 1605), in Spanish, its original language.

Around 40 eTexts per month were released during the 1st semester 2001, and 50
eTexts during the 2nd semester. Released in December 2000, the 3000th eText was
the third volume of A l'ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs (In the Shadow of
Young Girls in Flower), by Marcel Proust (published in 1919), in French, its
original language.

Released in October 2001, the 4000th eText was The French Immortals Series, in
English. Published in 1905 by Maison Mazarin, Paris, this book is an anthology
of short fictions by authors belonging to the renowned French Academy (Académie
française), notably Emile Souvestre, Pierre Loti, Hector Malot, Charles de
Bernard and Alphonse Daudet.

Available in April 2002, the 5000th eText was The Notebooks of Leonardo da
Vinci, which he wrote at the beginning of the 16th century. A text that is still
in the Top 100 of downloaded texts in 2005.

In 1988, Michael Hart chose to digitize Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and
Peter Pan because they each fitted on one 360 K disk, the standard of the time.
Fifteen years later, in 2002, 1.44 M is the standard disk and ZIP is the
standard compression. The practical file size is about 3 million characters,
more than long enough for the average book. The digitized ASCII version of a
300-page novel is 1 M. A bulky book can fit in two ASCII files, that can be
downloaded as is or in ZIP format.

An average of 50 hours is necessary to get an eText selected, copyright-cleared,
scanned, proofread, formatted and assembled.

A few numbers are reserved for "special" books. For example, eText number 1984
is reserved for George Orwell's classic, published in 1949, and still a long way
from falling into the public domain.

In 2002, around 100 eTexts were released per month. In Spring 2002, Project
Gutenberg's eTexts represented 1/4 of all the public domain works freely
available on the web and listed nearly exhaustively by The Internet Public
Library (IPL). An impressive result thanks to the relentless work of 1,000
volunteers in several countries.

= 10,000 eBooks in October 2003

1,000 eTexts in August 1997, 2,000 eTexts in May 1999, 3,000 eTexts in December
2000, 4,000 eTexts in October 2001, 5,000 eTexts in April 2002, 10,000 eTexts in
October 2003. eText number 10000 is The Magna Carta, the first English
constitutional text, signed at the beginning of the 13th century.

From April 2002 to October 2003, in 18 months, the number of eTexts doubled,
going from 5,000 to 10,000, with a monthly average of 300 new digitized books.
In December 2003, most of the titles (9,400 eBooks) were also burned on a DVD to
celebrate the landmark of 10,000 eTexts, renamed as eBooks, according to the
latest terminology in the field. A few months before, in August 2003, a "Best of
Gutenberg" CD was made available containing 600 eBooks (as a follow-up to other
CDs in the past). People could request the CD and DVD for free, and were then
encouraged to make copies for a friend, a library or a school. (In 2005, CD and
DVD files are also periodically generated as ISO files. When downloaded, they
can be used to make a CD or DVD using a CD or DVD writer.)

10,000 eBooks. An impressive number if we think about all the scanned and
proofread pages this number represents. A fast growth thanks to Distributed
Proofreaders, a website designed in 2000 by Charles Franks to share the
proofreading of eBooks between many volunteers. Volunteers choose one of the
eBooks listed on the site and proofread a given page. They don't have any quota
to fulfill, but it is recommended they do a page per day if possible. It doesn't
seem much, but with hundreds of volunteers it really adds up.

In December 2003, there were 11,000 eBooks digizited in several formats, most of
them in ASCII, and some of them in HTML or XML. This represented 46,000 files,
and 110 G. On 13 February 2004, the day of Michael Hart's presentation at
UNESCO, in Paris (see below), there were exactly 11,340 eBooks in 25 languages.
In May 2004, the 12,581 eBooks represented 100,000 files in 20 different
formats, and 135 gigabytes. With 400 new eBooks added per month (and more in the
years to come), the number of gigabytes is expected to double every year.

= 15,000 eBooks in January 2005

In January 2005, Project Gutenberg had 15,000 eBooks. eBook number 15000 is The
Life of Reason, by George Santayana (published in 1906). On June 16, 2005 there
were 16,481 eBooks in 42 languages. On August 3, 2005, besides English (14,590
eBooks), the six main languages were French (578 eBooks), German (349 eBooks),
Finnish (225 eBooks), Dutch (130 eBooks), Spanish (105 eBooks) and Chinese (69
eBooks).

Michael hopes to reach 1,000,000 eBooks by 2015. Each email he sends includes
the current number, and the next significant goal to reach. As of July 2005, the
next goal is 20,000 eBooks. This goal should be reached in July 2006, for the
35th anniversary of Project Gutenberg.

Conceived in January 2004, at the same time as the launching of Distributed
Proofreaders Europe (DP Europe) by Project Rastko, Project Gutenberg Europe went
online in June 2005 and released the 100 first eBooks processed by DP Europe
over the past several months. These eBooks are in several languages, a
reflection of European linguistic diversity. 100 languages are planned for the
long term.

In July 2005, Project Gutenberg of Australia (launched in 2001) reached 500
eBooks, and Project Gutenberg of Canada took its first steps (see the PGCanada
List). Project Gutenberg Portugal and Project Gutenberg Philippines will be
next. (For the latest news, check the News and Events of Project Gutenberg.)


3. THE PUBLIC DOMAIN, AN ENDLESS TOPIC


Despite the enthusiasm and the persistence of its hundreds of volunteers, the
task of Project Gutenberg isn't made any easier by the increasing restrictions
to the public domain. As stated in the FAQ, "the public domain is the set of
cultural works that are free of copyright, and belong to everyone equally." In
former times, 50% of works belonged to the public domain, and could be freely
used by everybody. Nowadays, 99% of works are governed by copyright, and some
people would like this percentage to reach 100%.

In the Copyright HowTo section, Project Gutenberg presents its own rules for
confirming the public domain status of eBooks according to US copyright laws.
Here is a summary. Works published before 1923 entered the public domain no
later than 75 years from the copyright date. (All these works are now in the
public domain.) Works published between 1923 and 1977 retain copyright for 95
years. (No such works will enter the public domain until 2019.) Works created
from 1978 on enter the public domain 70 years after the death of the author if
the author is a natural person. (Nothing will enter the public domain until
2049.) Works created from 1978 on enter the public domain 95 years after
publication (or 120 years after creation) if the author is a corporate one.
(Nothing will enter the public domain until 2074.) Other rules apply too.

Much more restrictive than the previous one, the current legislation became
effective after the promulgation of amendments to the 1976 Copyright Act, dated
October 27th, 1998. As explained by Michael Hart in July 1999: "Nothing will
expire for another 20 years. We used to have to wait 75 years. Now it is 95
years. And it was 28 years (+ a possible 28 year extension, only on request)
before that, and 14 years (+ a possible 14 year extension) before that. So, as
you can see, this is a serious degrading of the public domain, as a matter of
continuing policy."

The dates mentioned by Michael are: a) 1790, date of the stranglehold of the
Stationers' Guild (the publishers of the time) on the Gutenberg printing press
(hence the 14-year copyright); b) 1909, date of the copyright reinforcement to
counter the re-publishing of large collections of the public domain by reprint
houses using steam and electric presses (hence the 28-year copyright); c) 1976,
date of a new tightening of the copyright following the introduction of the
Xerox photocopying machine (hence the 50-year copyright after the author's
life); d) 1998, date of a further tightening of the copyright following the
development of the internet (hence the 70-year copyright after the author's
life). These are only the main lines. The Copyright Act has been amended 11
times in the last 40 years.

As stated by Tom W. Bell in Trend of Maximum U.S. General Copyright Term (with a
very useful chart): "The first federal copyright legislation, the 1790 Copyright
Act, set the maximum term at fourteen years plus a renewal term of fourteen
years. The 1831 Copyright Act doubled the initial term and retained the
conditional renewal term, allowing a total of up to forty-two years of
protection. Lawmakers doubled the renewal term in 1909, letting copyrights run
for up to fifty-six years. The interim renewal acts of 1962 through 1974 ensured
that the copyright in any work in its second term as of September 19, 1962,
would not expire before Dec. 31, 1976. The 1976 Copyright Act changed the
measure of the default copyright term to life of the author plus fifty years.
Recent amendments to the Copyright Act [the ones in 1998] expanded the term yet
again, letting it run for the life of the author plus seventy years."

The amendments of the Copyright Act, dated October 27, 1998, were a major blow
for digital libraries and deeply shocked their founders, beginning with Michael
Hart and John Mark Ockerbloom, founder of The Online Books Page. But how were
they to measure up to the major publishing companies? Michael wrote in July
1999: "No one has said more against copyright extensions than I have, but
Hollywood and the big publishers have seen to it that our Congress won't even
mention it in public. The kind of copyright debate going on is totally
impractical. It is run by and for the 'Landed Gentry of the Information Age.'
'Information Age'? For whom?"

True enough. The political authorities continually speak about an information
age while tightening the laws relating to the dissemination of information. The
contradiction is obvious. This problem has also affected Australia (forcing
Project Gutenberg of Australia to withdraw dozens of books from its collections)
and several European countries. In a number of countries, the rule is now life
of the author plus 70 years, instead of life plus 50 years, following pressure
from content owners, with the subsequent "harmonization" of national copyright
laws as a response to the "globalization of the market". (The Online Books Page
gives a summary of the various copyright regimes, with a number of useful
links.)

Now, from the volunteer point of view, the wisest thing to do is to choose a
book published before 1923. It is also required that copyright clearance be
confirmed prior to working on any eBook by sending a photocopy of the title page
and verso page (even if the latter is blank) to Michael. The pages should be
sent as scans to be uploaded on the website. For people who cannot create scans,
it is possible to send photocopies by postal mail. The pages will then be filed,
either on paper or electronically, so that the proof will be available in the
future, to demonstrate if necessary that the book is in the public domain under
the US law. Project Gutenberg doesn't release any eBook until the book's
copyright status has been confirmed.

There is nevertheless hope for some books published after 1923. According to
Greg Newby, director of PGLAF (Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation),
one million books published between 1923 and 1964 could also belong to the
public domain, because only 10% of copyrights were actually renewed. Project
Gutenberg tries to locate these books. In April 2004, with the help of hundreds
of volunteers at Distributed Proofreaders, all Copyright Renewal records were
posted for books from 1950 through 1977. So, if a given book published during
this period is not on the list, it means the copyright was not renewed, and the
book fell into the public domain.


4. THE METHOD ADOPTED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG


Whether digitized years ago or now, all the books are digitized in 7-bit plain
ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange), called Plain Vanilla
ASCII. Used since the beginnings of computing, it is the set of unaccented
characters present on a standard English-language keyboard (A-Z, a-z, numbers,
punctuation and other basic symbols). When 8-bit ASCII (also called ISO-8859 or
ISO-Latin) is used for books with accented characters like French or German,
Project Gutenberg also produces a 7-bit ASCII version with the accents stripped.
(This doesn't apply for languages that are not "convertible" in ASCII, like
Chinese, encoded in Big-5.)

Plain Vanilla ASCII is the best format by far. It is "the lowest common
denominator". It can be read, written, copied and printed by any simple text
editor or word processor on every computer in the world. It is the only format
compatible with 99% of hardware and software. It can be used as it is or to
create versions in many other formats. It will still be used while other formats
will be obsolete (or are already obsolete, like formats of a few short-lived
reading devices launched between 1999 and 2003). It is the assurance collections
will never be obsolete, and will survive future technological changes. The goal
is to preserve the texts not only over decades but over centuries. There is no
other standard as widely used as ASCII right now, even Unicode, a "universal"
encoding system created in 1991.

Project Gutenberg also publishes eBooks in well-known formats like HTML, XML or
RTF. There are Unicode files too. Any other format provided by volunteers (PDF,
LIT, TeX and many others) is usually accepted, as long as they also supply an
ASCII version where possible.

But a large scale conversion into other formats is handed over to other
organizations. For example Blackmask Online, which uses Project Gutenberg's
collections to offer thousands of free eBooks in eight different formats based
on the Open eBook (OeB) format. Or Manybooks.net, which converts Project
Gutenberg's eBooks into formats readable on PDAs. Or Bookshare.org, the main
digital library for the visual impaired community in the US, which converts
books from Project Gutenberg into Braille format and DAISY (Digital Audio
Information System) format.

What is entailed exactly, once copyright clearance is received? Digitization is
done by scanning the book page after page to get "image" files. Then volunteers
run an OCR (Optical Character Recognition) software to convert "image" files
into text files. Then each text file is proofread (i.e. re-read and corrected)
by comparing it to the "image" file or the original page of the print version.
There is an average of 10 mistakes per page for a good OCR package and... many
more mistakes if the quality of the scanner and the OCR package is not great.

The book is proofread twice on the computer screen by two different people, who
make any corrections necessary. When the original is in poor condition, as with
very old books, it is keyed in manually, word by word. Some volunteers
themselves prefer to type short texts, or works they particularly like. But most
books are scanned, "OCRized" and proofread.

Digitization in "text format" means a book can be copied, indexed, searched,
analyzed and compared with other books. It is possible to search the content of
the book with the "Find" button available in any browser and any software,
without a specific search engine. Project Gutenberg provides a "Nearly Full
Text" search (on the first 100 K of each file) using Google, with a database
updated approximately monthly. It also provides a search of book metadata
(author, title, brief description, keywords) as a participant in Yahoo!'s
Content Acquisition Program, with a database updated weekly. (Please see the
bottom of the Online Book Catalog.) In the Advanced Search, several fields can
be filled: author, title, subject, language, category (any, audio book, music,
pictures), LoCC (Library of Congress Catalog classification), filetype (text,
PDF, HTML, XML, JPEG, etc.), and eText/eBook No. A field "Full Text" was
recently added as an experimental feature.

The assets of digitization in "text format" are numerous. It makes a smaller and
more easily sendable computer file, unlike digitization in "image format", which
produces a bulky "photo" file. Contrary to other formats, the files are
accessible for low-bandwidth use. They can be copied as much as needed to
produce new digital or print versions for free. The typos pointed out after the
text is released can be fixed at any time. Readers can change the font and size
of characters, the margins or the number of lines per page. Visually impaired
readers can increase the letter size. Blind readers can use speech recognition
software. All this is very difficult, if not impossible, with many other
formats.

If the eBooks released are 99.9% accurate in the eyes of the general reader, the
goal is not to create authoritative editions, and to argue with a picky reader
whether a certain sentence should have a colon instead of a semi-colon between
its clauses.

Project Gutenberg is convinced that proofreading by human beings is a very
important step, and that this step makes all the difference. The use of scanned
books as is --converted to text format by OCR software with no proofreading--
gives a much lower quality result. After running OCR software, the text is 99%
reliable, in the best of cases. After proofreading, the text becomes 99.95%
reliable (a high percentage which is also the standard at the Library of
Congress).

For this reason, Project Gutenberg's perspective is rather different from that
of the Million Book Project, another project launched by several professors from
Carnegie Mellon University, and whose collections (10,611 books on June 1st,
2005) are hosted by the Internet Archive (the Internet Archive is also the
backup distribution site of Project Gutenberg). In the case of the Million Book
Project, books are scanned and "OCRized", but they are not proofread. The main
formats used are XML, TIF and DjVu.

On Project Gutenberg's website, a File Recode Service allows users to convert
books in one format (ASCII, ISO-8859, Unicode and Big-5) into another, and vice
versa. A much more powerful conversion program may be launched in the future,
with a conversion into still more formats (XML, HTML, PDF, TeX, RTF), including
Braille and voice. It will then also be possible to choose the font and size of
characters and the background color. Another eagerly expected conversion is that
of a book from one language to another by machine translation software. This may
be possible in a few years, when machine translation is accurate to 99%.


5. DISTRIBUTED PROOFREADERS, TO HANDLE SHARED PROOFREADING


The main "leap forward" of Project Gutenberg in the last few years is due to
Distributed Proofreaders.

Distributed Proofreaders was conceived in 2000 by Charles Franks to help in the
digitizing of public domain books. Originally meant to assist Project Gutenberg
in the handling of shared proofreading, Distributed Proofreaders became the main
source of Project Gutenberg eBooks. In 2002, Distributed Proofreaders became an
official Project Gutenberg site.

The number of eBooks that have been processed through Distributed Proofreaders
has grown fast, with a total of 3,000 eBooks in February 2004, 5,000 eBooks in
October 2004 and 7,000 eBooks in May 2005. On August 3, 2005, 7,639 books were
complete (processed through the site and posted to Project Gutenberg), 1,250
books were in progress (processed through the site but not yet posted, because
currently going through their final proofreading and assembly), and 831 books
were being proofread (currently being processed).

From the website one can access a program that allows several proofreaders to be
working on the same book at the same time, each proofreading on different pages.
This significantly speeds up the proofreading process. Volunteers register and
receive detailed instructions. For example, words in bold, italic or underlined,
or footnotes are always treated the same way for any eBook. A discussion forum
allows them to ask questions or seek help at any time. A project manager
oversees the progress of a particular book through its different steps on the
website.

Each time proofreaders go to the website, they choose the book they want. One
page of the book appears in two forms side by side: the scanned image of one
page and the text from that image (as produced by OCR software). The proofreader
can easily compare both versions, note the differences and fix them. OCR is
usually 99% accurate, which makes for about 10 corrections a page. The
proofreader saves each page as it is completed and can then either stop work or
do another. The books are proofread twice, and the second time only by
experienced proofreaders. All the pages of the book are then formatted, combined
and assembled by post-processors to make an eBook. (For more detailed
information, check the FAQ Central.) The eBook is now ready to be posted with an
index entry (title, subtitle, author, eBook number and character set) for the
database. Indexers go on with the cataloguing process (author's dates of birth
and death, Library of Congress classification, etc.) after the release.

Volunteers don't have a quota to fill, but it is recommended they do a page a
day if possible. It doesn't seem much, but with hundreds of volunteers it really
adds up. In 2003, about 250-300 people were working each day all over the world,
producing a daily total of 2,500-3,000 pages, the equivalent of two pages a
minute. In 2004, the average was 300-400 proofreaders participating each day,
and finishing 4,000-7,000 pages per day, the equivalent of four pages a minute.

Volunteers can also work independently, after contacting Project Gutenberg
directly, by keying in a book they particularly like using any text editor or
word processor. They can also scan it and convert it into text using OCR
software, and then make corrections by comparing it with the original. In each
case, someone else will proofread it. They can use ASCII and any other format.
Everybody is welcome, whatever the method and whatever the format.

New volunteers are most welcome too at Distributed Proofreaders (DP-INT) and
Distributed Proofreaders Europe (DP Europe). Any volunteer anywhere is welcome,
for any language. There is a lot to do. As stated on both websites, "Remember
that there is no commitment expected on this site. Proofread as often or as
seldom as you like, and as many or as few pages as you like. We encourage people
to do 'a page a day', but it's entirely up to you! We hope you will join us in
our mission of 'preserving the literary history of the world in a freely
available form for everyone to use'."


6. EBOOKS IN MORE AND MORE LANGUAGES


What about languages?

Initially, the eBooks were mostly in English. As Project Gutenberg is based in
the United States, it first focused on the English-speaking community in the
country and worldwide.

In October 1997, Michael Hart expressed his intention to expand the publishing
of eBooks in other languages. At the beginning of 1998, the catalog had a few
titles in French (10 titles), German, Italian, Spanish and Latin. In July 1999,
Michael wrote: "I am publishing in one new language per month right now, and
will continue as long as possible."

In early 2004, there were works in 25 languages. In July 2005, there were works
in 42 languages, including Iroquoian, Sanskrit and the Mayan languages. The
seven "main" languages were: English (with 14,548 books on July 27, 2005),
French (577 books), German (349 books), Finnish (218 books), Dutch (130 books),
Spanish (103 books) and Chinese (69 books).

Let us take French as an example. On February 13, 2004, there were 181 eBooks in
French (out of a total of 11,340 eBooks). On May 16, 2005, there were 547 eBooks
in French (out of 15,505 Books). The number tripled in 15 months. This number
should rise significantly during the next few years, notably with Project
Gutenberg Europe (launched in June 2005).

What were the first eBooks posted in French? They were six novels by Stendhal
and two novels by Jules Verne, all released in early 1997. The six novels by
Stendhal were: L'Abbesse de Castro, Les Cenci, La Chartreuse de Parme, La
Duchesse de Palliano, Le Rouge et le Noir and Vittoria Accoramboni. The two
novels by Jules Verne were: De la terre à la lune and Le tour du monde en
quatre-vingts jours. In early 1997, whereas Project Gutenberg offered no English
version of any of Stendhal's writings (yet), three of Jules Verne's novels were
available in English: 20,000 Leagues Under the Seas (original title: Vingt mille
lieues sous les mers), posted in September 1994; Around the World in 80 Days
(original title: Le tour du monde en quatre-vingts jours), posted in January
1994 and From the Earth to the Moon(original title: De la terre à la lune),
posted in September 1993. Stendhal and Jules Verne were followed by Edmond
Rostand with Cyrano de Bergerac, posted in March 1998.

In late 1999, the "Top 20" --the 20 most downloaded authors-- included Jules
Verne at 11 and Emile Zola at 16. They still have a very good ranking in the
present "Top 100".

As a side remark, the first "images" ever made available by Project Gutenberg
were French Cave Paintings, posted in April 1995, with an XHTML version posted
in November 2000. This eBook contains four photos of paleolithic paintings found
in a grotto located in Ardèche, a region of south-eastern France. These photos,
which are copyrighted, were made available to Project Gutenberg thanks to Jean
Clottes, a French general curator for cultural heritage (conservateur général du
patrimoine), for everyone to enjoy them.

Multilingualism is now one of the priorities of Project Gutenberg, like
internationalization. In early 2004, Michael Hart went off to Europe, with stops
in Paris, Brussels and Belgrade. He gave a lecture on February 12, 2004 at
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization)
headquarters in Paris. He chaired a discussion at the French National Assembly
on February 13. The following week, he addressed the European Parliament, in
Brussels. He also met with the team of Project Rastko, in Belgrade, to support
the creation of Distributed Proofreaders Europe (launched in January 2004) and
Project Gutenberg Europe (conceived at the same time, and launched in June
2005).

The launching of Distributed Proofreaders Europe (DP Europe) by Project Rastko
was indeed a very important step. DP Europe uses the software of the original
Distributed Proofreaders and is dedicated to the proofreading of eBooks for
Project Gutenberg Europe. Since its very beginnings, DP Europe has been a
multilingual website, with its main pages translated into several European
languages by volunteer translators. In April 2004, DP Europe was available in 12
languages. The long-term goal is 60 languages and 60 linguistic teams
representing all the European languages. When it gets up to speed, DP Europe
will provide eBooks for several national and/or linguistic digital libraries,
for example Projet Gutenberg France for France. The goal is for every country to
have its own digital library (according to the country copyright limitations),
within a continental network (for France, the European network) and a global
network (for the whole planet).

A few lines now on Project Rastko, which had the boldness to launch such a
difficult and exciting project for Europe, and catalysed volunteers' energy in
both Eastern and Western Europe (and anywhere else: as the internet has no
boundaries, there is no need to live in Europe to register). Founded in 1997,
Project Rastko is a non-governmental cultural and educational project. One of
its goals is the online publishing of Serbian culture. It is part of the Balkans
Cultural Network Initiative, a regional cultural network for the Balkan
peninsula in south-eastern Europe.

In May 2005, Distributed Proofreaders Europe finished processing its 100th
eBook. In June 2005 Project Gutenberg Europe was launched with these first 100
eBooks. PG Europe operates under "life +50" copyright laws. On August 3, 2005,
137 books were complete (processed through the site and posted to Project
Gutenberg Europe), 418 books were in progress (processed through the site but
not yet posted, because currently going through their final proofreading and
assembly), and 125 books were being proofread (currently being processed). DP
Europe supports Unicode to be able to proofread eBooks in numerous languages.
Unicode is an encoding system created in 1991 that gives a unique number for
every character in any language.
From the Past to the Future

10 books online in August 1989; 100 books in January 1994; 1,000 books in August
1997; 2,000 books in May 1999; 3,000 books in December 2000; 4,000 books in
October 2001; 5,000 books in April 2002; 10,000 books in October 2003; 15,000
books in January 2005; and 1 million books planned for 2015.

But Project Gutenberg's results are not only measured in numbers, which can't
compete yet with the number of print books in the public domain. The results
also include the major influence that the project has had. As the oldest
producer of free eBooks on the internet, Project Gutenberg has inspired many
other digital libraries, for example Projekt Gutenberg-DE for classic German
literature and Projekt Runeberg for classic Nordic (Scandinavian) literature, to
name only two.

Project Gutenberg keeps its administrative and financial structure to the bare
minimum. Its motto fits into three words: "Less is more". The minimal rules give
much space to volunteers and to new ideas. The goal is to ensure its
independence from loans and other funding and from ephemeral cultural
priorities, to avoid pressure from politicians or economic interests. The aim is
also to ensure respect for the volunteers, who can be confident their work will
be used not just for decades but for centuries. Volunteers can network through
mailing lists and weekly or monthly newsletters. Donations are used to buy
equipment and supplies, mostly computers and scanners. Founded in 2000, the
PGLAF (Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation) has only three part-time
employees.

More generally, Michael should be given more credit as the real inventor of the
eBook. If we consider the eBook in its etymological sense, that is to say a book
that has been digitized to be distributed as an electronic file, it is now 34
years old and was born with Project Gutenberg in July 1971. This is a much more
comforting paternity than the various commercial launchings in proprietary
formats that peppered the early 2000s. There is no reason for the term "eBook"
to be the monopoly of Amazon, Barnes & Noble, Gemstar and others. The
non-commercial eBook is a full eBook, and not a "poor" version, just as
non-commercial ePublishing is a fully-fledged way of publishing, and as valuable
as commercial ePublishing. Project Gutenberg eTexts are now called eBooks, to
use the recent terminology in the field.

In July 1971, sending a 5K file to 100 people would have crashed the network of
the time. In November 2002, Project Gutenberg could post the 75 files of the
Human Genome Project, with files of dozens or hundreds of megabytes, shortly
after its initial release in February 2001, because it was public domain. In
2004, a computer hard disk costing US$140 could potentially hold the entire
Library of Congress. And we probably are only a few years away from a storage
disk capable of holding all the print media of our planet.

What about documents other than text?

In September 2003, Project Gutenberg launched Project Gutenberg Audio eBooks. As
of 2005, there are 391 computer-generated audio books and a few human-read audio
books. The number of human-read eBooks should greatly increase over the next few
years. As for computer-generated eBooks, it seems they won't be stored in a
specific section any more, but "converted" when requested from the existing
electronic files in the main collections. Voice-activated requests will be
possible, as a useful tool for visually impaired readers.

Launched at the same time, The Sheet Music Subproject is dedicated to digitized
music sheet. It also contains a few music recordings. Some still pictures and
moving pictures are also available. These new collections should take off in the
future.

But digitizing books remains the priority, and there is a big demand, as
confirmed by the tens of thousands of eBooks that are downloaded every day. For
example, on July 31, 2005, there were 37,532 downloads for the day, 243,808
downloads for the week (July 24-31), and 1,154,765 downloads for the month. This
only for transfers from ibiblio.org (University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill), the main eBook distribution site (which also hosts the website). The
Internet Archive is the backup distribution site and provides unlimited disk
space for storage and processing. Project Gutenberg has 44 mirror sites in many
countries and is looking for new ones. It also encourages the use of P2P for
sharing its eBooks. The "Top 100" lists the top 100 eBooks and the top 100
authors for the previous day, the last 7 days and the last 30 days.

Project Gutenberg eBooks can also help bridge the "digital divide." They can be
read on a computer or a secondhand PDA costing just a few dollars. Solar-powered
PDAs offer a good solution in remote regions and developing countries.

eBooks are also copied on CDs and DVDs. Blank CDs and DVDs cost next to nothing,
as does their burning on a CD or DVD writer. Project Gutenberg sends a free CD
or DVD to anyone who asks for it, and people are encouraged to make copies for a
friend, a library or a school. Released in August 2003, the "Best of Gutenberg"
CD contains over 600 eBooks. Released in December 2003, the first Project
Gutenberg DVD contains 9,400 eBooks. A new DVD is in preparation. The current
prototype contains nearly 26,000 eBooks (with some titles in different versions
and formats), and is about 3/4 full.

By the time the collections hit one million eBooks in 2015 or before, it is
hoped machine translation software will be able to convert them from one to
another of 100 languages. In ten years from now, it is possible that machine
translation will be judged 99% satisfactory (research is very active on that
front, but there is still a lot to do), allowing for the reading of literary
classics in a choice of many languages. In 2004, Project Gutenberg was in touch
with a European project studying how to combine translation software and human
translators, somewhat as OCR software is now combined with the work of
proofreaders.

34 years after the beginnings of Project Gutenberg, Michael Hart describes
himself as a workaholic who devotes his entire life to his project, because he
thinks eBooks will become the "killer ap(plication)" of the computer revolution.
He considers himself a pragmatic and farsighted altruist. For years he was
regarded as a nut but now he is respected. He wants to change the world through
freely-available eBooks that can be used and copied endlessly. Reading and
culture for everyone at minimal cost. Project Gutenberg's mission can be stated
in eight words: "To encourage the creation and distribution of eBooks," by
everybody, and by every possible means. While implementing new ideas, new
methods and new software.

Let us give the last word to Michael, whom I asked in August 1998: "What is your
best experience with the internet?" His answer was: "The notes I get that tell
me people appreciate that I have spent my life putting books, etc., on the
internet. Some are quite touching, and can make my whole day." Seven years
later, he confirms that his answer would still be the same.


7. CHRONOLOGY [UPDATED IN 2006]


1971 (July): Michael Hart keyed in The United States Declaration of Independence
(eBook # 1) and informed the first 100 internet users. Project Gutenberg was
born.

1972: He keyed in The United States Bill of Rights (eBook # 2).

1973: He keyed in The United States Constitution (eBook # 5).

1974-1988: He keyed in parts of the Bible and several works by Shakespeare.

1989 (August): The King James Bible (eBook # 10).

1991 (January): Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (eBook # 11).

1991 (June): Peter Pan (eBook # 16).

1991: Digitization of one book per month.

1992: Digitization of two books per month.

1993: Digitization of four books per month.

1993 (December): Creation of three main sections: Light Literature, Heavy
Literature and Reference Literature.

1994: Digitization of eight books per month.

1994 (January): The Complete Works of William Shakespeare (eBook # 100).

1995: Digitization of 16 books per month.

1996-1997: Digitization of 32 books per month.

1997 (August): La Divina Commedia di Dante, in Italian (eBook # 1000).

1997: Launching of the Project Gutenberg Consortia Center.

1998-2000: Digitization of 36 books per month.

1999 (May): Don Quijote, by Cervantes, in Spanish (eBook # 2000).

2000: Creation of the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.

2000 (October): Charles Franks conceived Distributed Proofreaders to assist
Project Gutenberg.

2000 (December): A l'ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs, 3rd volume, by Proust,
in French (eBook # 3000).

2001 (August): Creation of Project Gutenberg of Australia.

2001 (October): The French Immortals Series, in English (eBook # 4000).

2001: Digitization of 103 books per month.

2001: Distributed Proofreaders became the main source of Project Gutenberg
eBooks.

2002: Distributed Proofreaders became an official Project Gutenberg site.

2002 (April): The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, in English (eBook # 5000).

2003 (August): "Best of Gutenberg" CD with 600 eBooks.

2002: Digitization of 203 books per month.

2003 (September): Launching of Project Gutenberg Audio eBooks.

2003 (October): The number of eBooks doubled in 18 months, going from 5,000 to
10,000.

2003 (October): The Magna Carta (eBook # 10000).

2003 (December): First DVD, with 9,400 eBooks.

2003: Project Gutenberg Consortia Center became an official Project Gutenberg
site.

2003: Digitization of 355 books per month.

2004 (January): Launching of Project Gutenberg Europe by Project Rastko.

2004 (January): Launching of Distributed Proofreaders Europe by Project Rastko.

2004 (February): Michael Hart went off to Europe (Paris, Brussels, Belgrade).

2004 (February): Michael Hart's presentation at UNESCO headquarters, in Paris.

2004 (February): Michael Hart's visit to the European Parliament, in Brussels.

2004 (October): 5,000 eBooks processed by Distributed Proofreaders.

2004: Digitization of 336 books per month.

2005 (January): The Life of Reason, by George Santayana (eBook # 15000).

2005 (May): 7,000 eBooks processed by Distributed Proofreaders.

2005 (May): First 100 eBooks processed by Distributed Proofreaders Europe.

2005 (June): 16,000 eBooks in Project Gutenberg.

2005 (June): Project Gutenberg Europe has 100 eBooks.

2005 (July): First steps of Project Gutenberg of Canada.

2005 (October): 5th anniversary of Distributed Proofreaders.

2005: Digitization of 248 books per month.

2006 (January): Launching of Project Gutenberg PrePrints.

2006 (February): 8,000 eBooks processed by Distributed Proofreaders.

2006 (May): Creation of the Distributed Proofreaders Foundation.

2006 (July): 35th anniversary of Project Gutenberg.

2006 (July): New DVD, with 17,000 eBooks.

2006 (November): Launching of the Project Gutenberg News website.

2006 (December): 20,000 eBooks in Project Gutenberg.

2006 (December): 400 eBooks processed by Distributed Proofreaders Europe.

2006: Digitization of 360 books per month.

2010 (estimation): Automatic conversion in numerous formats.

2015 (estimation): 1,000,000 eBooks in Project Gutenberg.

2015 (estimation): Machine translation in 100 languages.


9. LINKS


Project Gutenberg: http://www.gutenberg.org/

Project Gutenberg's FAQ: http://www.gutenberg.org/faq/

Project Gutenberg Europe: http://pge.rastko.net/

Project Gutenberg of Australia: http://gutenberg.net.au/

Distributed Proofreaders: http://www.pgdp.net/

Distributed Proofreaders's FAQ Central:
http://www.pgdp.net/c/faq/faq_central.php

Distributed Proofreaders Europe: http://dp.rastko.net/

Project Gutenberg - Online Book Catalog: http://www.gutenberg.org/catalog/

Project Gutenberg - Advanced Search:
http://www.gutenberg.org/catalog/world/search

Project Gutenberg - Top 100: http://www.gutenberg.org/browse/scores/top

Project Gutenberg - By Language: French:
http://www.gutenberg.org/browse/languages/fr

Project Gutenberg Audio eBooks: http://www.gutenberg.org/audio/

Project Gutenberg - The Sheet Music Subproject: http://www.gutenberg.org/music/

Project Gutenberg - The CD and DVD Project: http://www.gutenberg.org/cdproject/


10. SHORT VERSION [DATED 2004]


MICHAEL HART: CHANGING THE WORLD THROUGH EBOOKS

[English version published by Project Gutenberg, 21 June 2004. Original version
published in French by Edition-Actu, 15 February 2004.]

When Michael Hart was a student at the University of Illinois (USA), in July
1971, he set up Project Gutenberg with the goal of making available for free,
and electronically, the largest possible number of books whose copyright had
expired.

This ground-breaking project became both the first Internet information site and
the world's first digitized library. Michael himself typed in the first hundred
books. When the Internet became widely-used, in the mid-1990s, the project got a
boost and an international dimension. Michael still typed and scanned in books,
but now coordinated the work of dozens and then hundreds of volunteers in many
countries.

The number of electronic books rose from 1,000 (in August 1997) to 2,000 (in May
1999), 3,000 (in December 2000) and 4,000 (in October 2001). Project Gutenberg
had 5,000 books online in April 2002 and topped 10,000 in October 2003, when it
had a team of 1,000 volunteers around the world making 350 new books available
every month. These 10,000 books are also available on DVD for US$1 each. Michael
hopes to have a million available by 2015.

The books are digitized in "text" format, with caps for terms in italic, bold or
underlined, so they can be read easily by any machine, operating system or
software. Digitization is done by scanning. The book is then proofread twice by
two different people, who make any corrections necessary. When the original is
in poor condition, as with very old books, it is typed in manually, word by
word.

Digitization in text format means a book can be copied, indexed, searched,
analyzed and compared with other books. It also makes a smaller and more easily
sendable computer file, unlike with scanning each page, which produces a bulky
"photo" file.

Hart describes himself as a workaholic who is devoting his entire life to the
project, which he sees as the start of a new Industrial Revolution. He considers
himself as a pragmatic and farsighted altruist. For years he was regarded as a
nut but now he is respected. He wants to change the world through
freely-available e-books that can be used and copied endlessly. Reading and
culture for everyone at minimal cost, on a computer or a secondhand PDA costing
just a few dollars, or even on a solar-powered PDA, which are starting to
appear.

In early 2004, after a stay on the US west coast, in San Francisco and Berkeley,
Hart went off to Europe, first Brussels and then Paris. He gave his first
lecture in France on 12 February at UNESCO headquarters in Paris, organised with
APRIL (Association pour la promotion et la recherche en informatique libre /
Association for Promotion and Research in Free Computing) and AFUL (Association
francophone des utilisateurs de Linux et des logiciels libres / French-speaking
Linux and Free Software Users' Association). He chaired a discussion at the
French National Assembly on 13 February at the invitation of the discussion
group "Produire et gérer les savoirs" (Producing and Managing Knowledge), a
branch of the "Les temps nouveaux" (New Times) group.

What about books in French? The first digitized books were mostly in English but
now there are works in 25 different languages. Of the 11,340 e-books available
as of 13 February 2004, 181 were in French. The launch of Project Gutenberg
Europe in the next few weeks should see the number grow considerably, and so
much the better.

There is much work to be done putting all the classics of French culture online
freely available to all in a easy and practical format. A total of 1,117 books
are currently accessible in text format on Gallica (Bibliothèque nationale de
France / French National Library), 288 on ABU (Association des bibliophiles
universels / The Universal Association of Booklovers), 195 in html and/or rtf
format on Athena, and several dozen more on other websites. Some digital
libraries specialize in shorter material. These include the Bibliothèque
électronique de Lisieux (Lisieux Electronic Library), which digitizes mostly
news and articles, or Miscellanées, which calls itself a "miscellaneous"
library.

PROJECT GUTENBERG: QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

[Original version published in French by Edition-Actu, 1st March 2004.]

Since my 15 February article about Michael Hart and Project Gutenberg, which
mentioned the forthcoming launch of Project Gutenberg Europe (Hart recently
spoke about it to the European Parliament), I've had a lot of questions from
readers. Here are some answers:

Remember Project Gutenberg is becoming international. Its main office is in the
United States, but Project Gutenberg Australia and Projekt Gutenberg-DE
(Germany) have been going for a long time. Project Gutenberg Europe will be
European, with a staff in Belgrade and links between the different projects. I
think it's interesting to build a French-language online library working with
other groups. It's preparing for the future, when machine translation will be
99% satisfactory (things are progressing well on that front, though there's a
lot still to do). In about 10 years, everyone will be able to call up literary
classics in a choice of about 100 languages. Let's work together instead of
separately, since for once it's possible.

Let's also remember that everyone working with Project Gutenberg is a volunteer,
including founder Michael Hart. The goal is to ensure its future independence of
loans and other funding and of fleeting political and cultural priorities, to
avoid any pressure from politicians or economic interests. The aim is also to
ensure respect for the volunteers, who can be confident their work will be used
for many years, even generations. Donations are used only to buy equipment and
supplies, mostly computers and scanners.

And then let's remember that all the books scanned in are proofread twice, by
two different people, to make sure they are 99.9% accurate. Software on the
website (which is still being tested) allows users to convert books in ASCII,
ISO-8859, Unicode and Big-5, for example, into other formats. Conversion will
eventually be possible into still more formats, including Braille and voice. So
there's no point arguing about which format is best. Text format can either be
used as is or to create others. Text-format books can also be easily used by
those who want to offer them in more sophisticated formats, without any
restriction except for respect for copyright laws in the country involved and
the availability of new free versions produced.

Some readers have asked about how volunteer proofreaders work. You go to the
Distributed Proofreaders Europe website that has just been put up (and is still
being tested) by Project Rastko (Belgrade) to handle the shared proofreading
done by Project Gutenberg Europe. Sign up and you'll then see detailed
instructions (which are still being translated in several languages). For
example, passages in bold, italic or underlined, like footnotes, are always
treated the same way, to standardize presentation of all the e-books. A
discussion forum allows you to ask questions or seek help at any time.

Each time you go to the website, you choose the book you want. Pages of the book
appear side by side in two forms - one the scanned image and the other the text
produced by OCR (optical character recognition) software. You compare the two
and make corrections. OCR is usually 99% accurate, which makes for about 10
corrections a page. You save each page you do and can then either stop work or
do another. All the books are proofread twice (the second time only by
experienced proofreaders) before the final version is ready for the public
(after which any further errors noted by readers are systematically corrected).

You don't have any quota to fulfill, but it's recommended you do a page a day if
possible. It doesn't seem much but with hundreds of volunteers it really adds
up. In 2003, on the original site of Distributed Proofreaders, about 250-300
people were working each day, producing a daily total of 2,500-3,000 pages, the
equivalent of two pages a minute.

Volunteers can also work independently, by digitizing a whole book in any
word-processing programme or else scan it in and convert it into text using OCR
software and then make corrections by comparing it with the original. In each
case, someone else will proofread it.

[These two articles appeared in French ("Michael Hart, ou la volonté de changer
le monde par le biais de l'ebook" & "Project Gutenberg: quelques réponses à vos
questions") in Edition Actu nos. 90 and 91, of 15 February and 1 March 2004.
Edition Actu is the electronic newsletter of CyLibris (distributed free every
fortnight) which aims to look at publishing from a different angle. CyLibris,
founded in Paris in August 1996 and a pioneer of online publishing, was the
first French publisher to use the Internet and digitization to bring out
literary works.]

Copyright © 2005 Marie Lebert







End of Project Gutenberg's Project Gutenberg (1971-2005), by Marie Lebert

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROJECT GUTENBERG (1971-2005) ***

***** This file should be named 27039-8.txt or 27039-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/0/3/27039/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
